# 2019-08-22 - Project Overview

This project is taking place over a six week rotation in the Bahl Lab. The focus of the lab is phylodynamics (how the viral phylogenies are shaped by epidemiology, immunodynamics, and evolutionary processes alone or by some interaction (Grenfell et al. 2004; Volz et al. 2013)).

Phylodynamics is a diverse field that is moving quickly. Similar to many fields of study today, one can get lost quickly in the chaos. I tried to get specific, keep it simple (given a the limited time of six weeks) but yet have some fun (why not, right?). After reading through some literature, my interests bifurcated into research around inter-host transmission of specific influenza A types (while looking at possible spillover events) and reassortment events during coinfection (are there segments that reassort non-randomly?). 

## Interhost Transmissions

To look at inter-host transmission (and some possibility of spillover), I started looking at influenza A H3N2. This is an avian influenza virus that has spread from avian hosts to a number of mammal species. Transmission events of H3N2 from swine to humans are already common. However, there have been no reports of transmission from either swine or humans to canines (or vice versa). Even still, influenza strains are always changing and it is possible that the H3N2 virus could be spread by dogs to humans. Furthermore, the spread of H3N2 from canines to felines has been detected in both [Indiana](https://www.uwsheltermedicine.com/news/2016/3/uw-shelter-medicine-wvdl-find-canine-influenza-transmitted-to-cats-in-midwestern-shelter) and [South Korea](ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/21715595). Regardless of no transmission events to date, some surveillance of H3N2 virus in global mammal species should be a prevention measure in place.

### What are your questions?

Is there any signal of interhost transmission of H3N2 between mammal host species (humans, swine and canines) to avian hosts? Is there any signal of transmission back from those avian hosts to mammal species? 

I suspect that there will be some signal of known interhost transmission (i.e swine to humans, avian to dogs). However, it is not clear to me, prior to this investigation, that there couldn't be a case of interhost transmission from mammals to birds and back to mammals. 

### How are you going to answer these questions?

To make these questions a bit more manageable within the limited time frame that I have, I am focusing on a specific location, China. I chose China because (1) it is one of the only locations where there is a persistence of H3N2 in the avian and mammal hosts of interest and (2) there is (seemingly) sufficient data from this location for avian and the mammal species of interest.

I decided to get H3N2 influenza virus HA protein sequence data sampled from avian, canine, human, and swine hosts from 2008 to 2019.

